Resting quietly between the Bay of Bengal
and the Andaman Sea
are the hundreds
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Around 30,000 people speak Nicobarese,
a language unique to these islands.
Some of our literature was translated
into Nicobarese in the early 2000’s,
but the time came for them
to have their own translation team.
So in 2007, the India branch
sent two brothers to organize it.
The brothers soon found many obstacles
to overcome
before the translation work could begin.
After searching for a while,
we found potential candidates
who could read, write,
and speak Nicobarese fluently
and we encouraged them
to use their skills for translation.
They really prepared their hearts
to benefit from the training given.
I was excited
and at the same time frightened.
I know the seriousness
of the responsibility
as translation is done for those
who do not understand another language.
The brother who came
to give training always told us,
“If you make yourself available,
Jehovah will make you capable.”
The best location for work
would have been on the Nicobar Islands
where the Nicobarese-speaking people live.
But it was restricted
after the devastating tsunami in 2004.
The brothers couldn’t leave
their jobs and go to the branch
because it’s
over 1,000 miles away (1,600 km).
So the capital of the islands,
Port Blair,
was the best place to work.
Some had to travel 24 hours by ship
from different islands to get there.
Our language has a limited vocabulary.
That is a challenge for us,
but as a team, we try to resolve it.
During the preparation,
if we find something
which is difficult to translate,
the three of us give our suggestions
and we try to find
a simpler way of translating
so the target audience gets the point.
In December 2004,
a tsunami devastated the islands
leaving many in search of comfort.
During the tsunami’s period,
those who never wanted
to hear the good news
wanted to come in the small room
where we used to conduct our meetings.
So I told them
the meeting can be conducted
in the open ground
where all the tsunami victims
were gathering.
They agreed because they
were eager to hear the truth.
Soon afterward,
the tract Would You Like to Know the Truth?
was translated into Nicobarese.
It immediately had a positive effect.
When people saw the tract in their language,
they were very happy.
On one island,
more than 20 people read the tract.
Most of them
have now dedicated themselves
to serve Jehovah.
Among them
were Boniface Joseph
and his wife, Polina Lucas.
The last question affected us:
“How can I find happiness in life?”
We were happy because the way it answered
was very simple and easy to understand.
We were moved to learn
more about the truth.
There were other questions
we never knew before
such as “What happens to us when we die?”
and “Will . . . suffering ever end?”
Even though the tsunami
almost snatched away
everything some of these brothers had,
they are now even more determined
to use their abilities in Jehovah’s service.
In the field ministry,
I met a lady and gave her one of our tracts.
She was happy to see it in her own language
because it is totally a new thing to them
as we don’t have any secular magazines
in our own language.
People in the congregation benefit from it.
Even new Bible students
have benefited who did not read well,
but now they can understand
what they’re reading
because it’s in their language.
It reaches their heart.
Nicobari literature has helped me
to keep my faith strong
because now when I read,
I can fully understand the meaning
and meditate on what I’m reading.
I feel God uses translation as a tool
to help people
to know more about him
and attract them to the truth
and save their lives.
With Jehovah’s blessing,
the challenging work of translating
the good news of his Kingdom
into Nicobarese
is contributing to the words
of Isaiah 42:12:
“Let them attribute glory to Jehovah
and declare his praise in the islands.”